---
title: Vim Tips
date: <2019-12-16>
---

Below are the following commands that may help you. If you ever get
stuck, type `:help` for more information.
**Normal Mode** is the default mode when entering Vim. 
This mode is mainly used for altering text. 
If not in Normal Mode, press `Esc` or `<C-[>` to return. 
Also, you can use these commands to exit any mode and return to Normal Mode.

## Moving Between Characters
- `[hjkl]` - move [left, bottom, top, right]
- `g[hjkl]` - move [left, bottom, top, right] on display lines
- `w | W` - next word
- `b | B` - previous word
- `e | E` - end of current or next word
- `ge | gE` - end of previous word
- `[g]0` - move to start of [display] line
- `[g]^` - move to first non-whitespace character of [display] line
- `[g]$` - move to end of [display] line

## Moving Between Lines
- `%` - jump to matching tag
- `(/)` - jump to start/end of next sentence
- `{/}` - jump to start/end of next paragraph
- `H/M/L` - jump to top/middle/bottom of screen
- `gg` - jump to start of file
- `G` - jump to end of file

## Moving Between Files
- `gf` - jump to filename under cursor
- `<C-]>` - jump to definition of keyword under cursor

- `z[tzb]` - redraw to [top, middle, bottom] of screen

Special Commands
- `.` - repeat last change

If you make any changes while in Normal Mode, the following commands
will help.
- `u` - undo change
- `<C-r>` - redo change

## One Shot Commands
The following commands peforms a one-shot action. 
- `~` - toggle case
- `x` - delete character
- `J` - join lines together
- `#[<C-a> | <C-x>]` - [add, subtract] #

**Operator-Pending Mode** is a mode that you briefly enter when typing
the following commands. These commands are usually appended by a motion. 
Some commands act on a line when typed twice.
- `c` - change
- `d` - delete
- `y` - yank
- `[<>]` - shift [left, right]
- `=` - autoindent
- `g~` - swap case
- `gu` - lowercase
- `gU` - uppercase
- `!` - filter through external program

## Character Search
These commands act on following characters and may be used to move
around more efficiently.
- `f?` - find next character
- `F?` - find previous character
- `t?` - find until next character
- `T?` - find until previous character
- `;` - go to next character
- `,` - go to previous character

**Macros** introduce a way to record multiple commands.
- `q?` - record and name a macro with any ? letter
- `@?` - start macro
- `@:` - repeat Ex command
- `@@` - repeat macro

**Text Objects** allow for greater control over which text to operate
on.
- `a[w, t, p, ) | b, } | B, ], >, ’, ", \`]` - around [word, tag,
paragraph, (), {}, [], '', "", ``]
- `i[w, t, p, ) | b, } | B, ], >, ', ", \`]` - in [word, tag,
paragraph, (), {}, [], '', "", ``]

## Marks
- `m[a-zA-Z]` - make mark
- `'[mark]` - jump to mark - ``` for exact column
- `'.` - jump to last change
- `'’` - jump to last position
- `'^` - jump to last insertion
- `'[` - jump to start of last change/yank
- `']` - jump to end of last change/yank
- `'<` - jump to start of visual selection
- `'>` - jump to end of visual selection

## Buffers
You can also navigate through buffers/jump list with these commands.
- `<C-o>` - move to previous buffer/jump
- `<C-i>` - move to next buffer/jump
- `<C-^>` - switch alternate buffers
- `<C-g>` - echo name & status of current buffer/file

You can also manipulate buffers through **Command Mode**.
- `:bp[revious]/bn[ext]` - interact with buffer list
- `:b[uffer] #` - go to specified buffer
- `:bufdo` - execute Ex command in all buffers
- `:bd[elete]` - delete buffer
- `:ls` - shows content of buffer list
- `:%` - filepath of active buffer - appending ':h' removes the filename
- `:lcd [path]` - set local working directory in window
- `:windo lcd [path]` - set local working directory for all windows in tab

## Windows
### Split Windows
- `<C-w>s` - split horizontally
- `<C-w>v` - split vertically
- `:sp[lit] [file]` - split horizontally
- `:vsp[lit] [file]` - split vertically

### Close Windows
- `<C-w>c` - close active window
- `<C-w>o` - keep only active window
- `:clo[se]/q[uit]` - close active window
- `:on[ly]` - keep only active window

### Change Focus
- `<C-w>w` - cycle through open windows
- `<C-w>[hjkl]` - focus [left, bottom, top, right] window

### Move Windows
- `<C-w>r` - rotate all windows
- `<C-w>x` - swap current window with neighbor
- `<C-w>[HJKL]` - move current window to [left, bottom, top, right]
- `<C-w>T` - move split window into new tab

### Resize Windows
- `<C-w>=` - equalize width/height of all windows
- `#<C-w>_` - maximize or set active window height to # rows
- `#<C-w>|` - maximize or set active window width to # columns
- `<C-w>[+-]` - [decrease, increase] active window height by 1 line

## Tabs
- `gt` - move to next tab
- `gT` - move to previous tab
- `#gt` - move to tab #
- `:tabe[dit] [file]` - open file in new tab
- `:tabc[lose]` - close current tab
- `:tabo[nly]` - keep only current tab
- `:tabn[ext] #` - go to tab # or next tab
- `:tabp[revious]` - go to previous tab
- `:tabl[ast]` - go to last tab
- `:tabmove #` - move tab

**Insert Mode** is used for inserting text. The following commands will
send you to Insert Mode.
- `i` - insert at character

**Insert & Command Modes** have some commands in common listed below.
- `<C-h>` - backspace
- `<C-w>` - delete back one word
- `<C-u>` - delete back to start of line

There are some ways to exit **Insert Mode**.
- `Esc` - go to **Normal Mode**
- `<C-[>` - go to **Normal Mode**

## Compound Commands
These commands will not only put you in Insert mode but also move to that
location.
- `gi` - insert at last insertion
- `I` - insert at start of line
- `a` - append after character
- `A` - append at end of line
- `C` - change line
- `o` - new line below
- `O` - new line above
- `s` - substitute character
- `S` - substitute line

**Insert Normal Mode** is a quick way to do a Normal Command before
returning to Insert Mode. Just press `<C-o>` to go to Normal Mode for
just one command.

## Registers
**Note:** prepend u to four-digit hexadecimal code
- `<C-r>[register]` - paste from specified register
- `<C-r><C-p>[register]` - paste unformatted text
- `<C-v>[code]` - convert to character
- `<C-k>[char1][char2]` - insert a digraph
- `ga` - show numeric code for current character
- "[register] - set a register 

**Expression Register** is a unique register to do quick calculations
and more. Just press `<C-r>=` to enter.

**Replace Mode** is a mode where you can change text without inserting
anything. The following commands will allow you to access this mode.
- `R` - enter Replace Mode
- `r` - replace character

**Virtual Replace Mode** is just like Replace Mode but can act on tabs
and whitespace as if they were spaces.
- `gR` - enter Virtual Replace Mode
- `gr` - replace virtual character

**Visual Mode** is utilized for selecting and operating on text. The
following commands will send you to Visual Mode. You can exit normally
or also press the following commands again.
- `v` - enter character-wise Visual Mode
- `V` - enter line-wise Visual Mode
- `<C-v>` - enter block-wise Visual Mode
- `gv` - reselect last visual selection

When in **Visual mode**, you can navigate and make changes with your selection.
- `o` - go to alternate end of selection
- `U` - uppercase selection
- `u` - lowercase selection

**Command Mode** allow you to make greater changes with Ex commands. To
enter this mode, press ':'.
- `:p[rint]` - echo current line
- `:[range]delete [register]` - delete into register
- `:[range]yank [register]` - yank into register
- `:#put [register]` - put text from register after line #
- `:[range]co[py]/t [address]` - copy lines to to below specififiedy by address
- `:[range]m[ove] [address]` - move lines to to below specififiedy by address
- `:[range]join` - join lines
- `:[range]norm[al] [command]` - execute normal command
- `:[range]global/[pattern]/[cmd]` - execute command on specified lines where pattern matches
- `:vglobal`

**Search Mode** is a way to search for long text.
- `*` - search current word
- `/` - search forward
- `?` - search backward
- `K` - search current word for man page
- `n` - go to next search
- `N` - repeat previous search

## Search and Substitute
- `:[range]s[ubstitute]/[pattern]/[string]/[flags]` - substitute
- `&` - repeat substitution

## Motion & Selection
- `:#` - specify line
- `:%` - entire file range/current file name
- `:0` - beginning of file
- `:$` - end of file
- `:.` - current line
- `:‘<,’>` - visual range
- `:[start],[end]` - specify range
- `:[address] + n` - offset range

## Navigation
- `[<C-p> | <C-n>]` - go to [previous, next] command
- `<C-r><C-w>` - copies current word into prompt
- `<C-d>` - autocomplete

## Shell
**Note**: To use the shell, it's recommended to use `<C-z>` & `fg`
instead.
- `:!` - run shell commands
- `:shell` - enter shell session
- `:pwd` - print working directory
- `:cd` - change directory
- `:find` - open file
- `:set path+=[subdir]` - specify directories Vim will look in

## Argument List
**Note**: May use globbing and backtick expansion.
- `:args` - list arguments
- `:first` - go to first arg
- `:next/prev[ious]` - navigate files in args
- `:argdo` - execute same command on each buffer in the set
- `:cfdo` - execute command in each file on quickfix list

## Files
- `:e[dit]` - create new file
- `:w[rite]` - save file/take buffer content into input
- `:wn[ext]` - save current file & edit next file
- `:up[date]` - save file only if buffer is modified
- `:read` - take output into buffer
- `:E[xplore]` - open file explorer for directory of active buffer
- `:Sex[plore]` - open file explorer horizontally
- `:Vex[plore]` - open file explorer vertically

**Command Line Window Mode** opens a buffer that allows you to edit its
specified history.
- `q:` - enter command line window with Ex commands history
- `q/` - enter command line window with search history
- `<C-f>` - switch to command line window

Changelist
- `g[;,]` - traverse backward/forward through each change

## Recommended Plugins
- vim commentary - gc operator to comment
- textobj-entire - ie ae text objects to select entire file
- unimpaired vim
- visual-star
- vim essential
- vim surround
- vim matchit
